# GIVE Tutorial 2.1: Using the testing reference on Zhong Lab server

## Using the MySQL database of Zhong Lab Web Server

This tutorial will use the testing reference `demo_test` at the MariaDB instance on `sysbio.ucsd.edu`.

### Using MySQL console

If you have a user account at the server, you may use the following command in a console to login:

```sh
$ mysql -u givdemo -p
Enter password: Demo0411
```

When you logged in successfully, you'll see something like the following in your console:

```text
Welcome to the MariaDB monitor.  Commands end with ; or \g.
Your MariaDB connection id is 28348
Server version: 10.1.21-MariaDB-1~xenial mariadb.org binary distribution

Copyright (c) 2000, 2016, Oracle, MariaDB Corporation Ab and others.

Type 'help;' or '\h' for help. Type '\c' to clear the current input statement.

MariaDB [(none)]>_
```

### Using phpMyAdmin

The MariaDB instance on `demo.give.genemo.org` can also be accessed via phpMyAdmin at <https://sysbio.ucsd.edu/phpmyadmin/>, just use the previous username and password to login.

*__Note:__ While there will probably be easier and more straightforward ways for almost every command, it is still possible to directly edit SQL command in phpMyAdmin. Therefore, this tutorial will only provide the SQL command to use in all the operations.*

__CAUTION:__ In SQL commands, single quotes (`''`) and double quotes (`""`) can both be used to quote strings (but not mixed use, so `'"` and `"'` is not good). There are also __backtick quotes (`` `` ``)__ used to quote table names, column names, etc, and they cannot be replaced by single or double quotes typically. Please make sure which quote is present in the command given.

## Adding tracks

Adding tracks to GIVE database typically involves two steps: one for metadata and one for data.

1.  Add the gene annotation data to the database.

    ***
    *__Note:__ Different types of tracks have different data format.*
    ***

2.  Add the track metadata in `trackDb` table;
    ```SQL
    INSERT INTO `demo_test`.`trackDb` VALUES ( -- *** Replace `demo_vlc` with your own DB name ***
      '<track_table_name>',                   -- Track table name
      '<track_type>',                   -- Track type: gene and gene prediction
      1,
      NULL,
      NULL,
      'track_group_id',                      -- Group name, should be the same as grp.name
      '{
        "group":"<track_group_id>",
        "longLabel":"<track_long_label>",
        "priority":1,
        "shortLabel":"<track_short_label>",
        "track":"<track_table_name>",
        "type":"<track_type>",
        "visibility":"full",
        [additional track settings]
      }'
    );
    ```

## Database table properties documentation

Here are a brief description of the properties you may use in the `settings` column of `trackDb`:

__shortLabel__  
> Type: `String`  
> Default: `''`  
> The short label shown by the track.

__longLabel__  
> Type: `String`  
> Default: `''`  
> The long label providing more information. Reserved.

__visibility__  
> Type: `enum` (`'full'`, `'pack'`, `'collapsed'`, `'dense'`, and `'hide'`)  
> Default: `'hide'`  
> The visibility of the track, left is more visible/prominent.

__adaptive__  
> Type: `Boolean`  
> Default: `false`  
> Whether the visibility will adapt to the height of the ending result. If the height exceeds certain threshold, the visibility will be degraded by one.

__dataType__, __cellType__, __trackFeature__, __labName__,  
__groupDataType__, __groupFeature__, __groupSampleType__  
> Type: `String`  
> Default: `null`  
> These are metadata of the tracks. Reserved for future features.
